# Adwords

## The adwords problem
- There is limited spae to place ads.
- The ads need to be relevant to the downloaded page by the user.
- All ads deserve the opportunity to be shown.

Given:
- A set of bids by advertisers for search queries
- A click-through rate for each advertiser-query pair
- A budget for each advertiser (say for 1 month)

Respond to each search query with a set of advertisers such that:
- The size of the set is no larger than the limit on the number of ads per query
- Each advertiser has bid on the search query
- Each advertiser has enough budget left to pay for the ad if it is clicked upon

## The Adwords simplification
- Every user has only one advert slot (if he has more, we simply repeat the ad selection for each slot).
- Every advert has the same expected revenue.

## Greedy algorithm
- For every query, pick any advertiser who has a bid on that query.

The greedy algorithm has the problem that generic queries might spend the whole budget of advertisers who have bids on a wide range queries. This means that very specific queries might not have any bidding matches, because all advertisers who covered a wide range of queries have already used up their budget. In general, the competitive ratio for the greedy algorithm is 50%.

## Balance algorithm
The balance algorithm is a simple improvement to the greedy algorithm. For each query, rather than picking any advertiser who has a bd for a particular query, we pick the advertiser with the largest remaining budget for that query. In general, the competitive ratio for the balance algorithm is 1 - 1/e ≈ 63%.